Like Physics, Language, Science, and Physical Education, Math is embedded in the world at every corner. Just like how there are a near infinite number of ways to work out, communicate ideas, and interact with the chemicals and physical properties in the world, there should be at least more than one way to solve math problems. Despite this, math classes will only pick one method of solving any given problem, and it’s usually a very convoluted and far removed shortcut of a once long and reasonable sequence of equations now forever lost to time. What makes this issue worse is the fact that the majority of math classes and math assignments have students work alone, isolated from the opinions and methods of their peers. New and cooperative approaches to learning mathematics tend to have positive results, as demonstrated in Johnsen’s study: “The findings of this action research showing an improvement in students’ attitudes toward mathematics are very similar to those of Gillies (2004) and Walmsley (2003). These studies also found an increase in students’ attitudes after working in cooperative learning groups. Gillies suggests that there is much to be gained by encouraging the use of this non-traditional pedagogical approach to teaching in classrooms, particularly when schools are trying to encourage the development of positive attitudes toward learning, prosocial behaviors among students, and successful learning outcomes for students. My experiences with trying cooperative learning in the classroom convinced me that cooperative learning can have a positive effect on students’ achievement and attitudes toward mathematics” (qtd. in Johnsen 20). When attempting to relearn calculus during his later college years, Wilkes describes, “...I didn’t remember any of the prerequisites from high school, so I didn’t even know how to solve the ‘easy problems’ down at the microscopic level. But that didn’t matter because I was free from all the restrictions of formal education, and there was no one to punish me from doing things wrong” (Wilkes 6). So if cooperative learning and flexible strategies to solving problems is repeatedly proven to help students not only get better, but feel better about math, why is it that modern math classes are so strict and narrow?
